Blog post for Rust 1.59.0 (#931)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/2022-02-24-Rust-1.59.0.md

---
layout: post
title: "Announcing Rust 1.59.0"
author: The Rust Release Team
release: true
---

The Rust team is happy to announce a new version of Rust, 1.59.0.
Rust is a programming language empowering everyone to build reliable and efficient software.

If you have a previous version of Rust installed via rustup, getting Rust 1.59.0 is as easy as:

```console
rustup update stable
```

If you don't have it already, you can [get `rustup`][install]
from the appropriate page on our website, and check out the
[detailed release notes for 1.59.0][notes] on GitHub.

[install]: https://www.rust-lang.org/install.html
[notes]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/RELEASES.md#version-1590-2022-02-24

## What's in 1.59.0 stable

### Inline assembly

The Rust language now supports inline assembly. This enables many applications
of Rust that need very low-level control over their execution, or access to
specialized machine instructions.

> When compiling for x86 and x86-64 targets, for instance, you can now write:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When compiling for x86-64 targets, for instance, you can now write:
```

The asm as written doesn't work on x86-32 because it wants a 64-bit register. Changing the `u64` to a `u32` would work on x86-32, but require some additional distracting changes to work on x86-64 (to use an `e` register rather than an `r` register). So, just narrow the example to x86-64.

```rust
use std::arch::asm;

// Multiply x by 6 using shifts and adds
let mut x: u64 = 4;
unsafe {
    asm!(
        "mov {tmp}, {x}",
        "shl {tmp}, 1",
        "shl {x}, 2",
        "add {x}, {tmp}",
        x = inout(reg) x,
        tmp = out(reg) _,
    );
}
assert_eq!(x, 4 * 6);
```

The format string syntax used to name registers in the `asm!` and `global_asm!`
macros is the same used in Rust format strings, so it should feel quite familiar
to Rust programmers.

> The syntax and instructions available in the assembly code itself vary according

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The assembly language and instructions available in the assembly code itself vary according
```

Maybe? Otherwise it might be interpreted as 'format string syntax' varies, which is not the case, I believe? Maybe we can also reword to something simpler, like "Each target has a fairly different set of instructions, so usage would often be cfg-gated in practice" or something like that?

> to the target architecture. Today, the following architectures are supported:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the target architecture. Today, the stable Rust compiler supports inline assembly on the following architectures:
```

* x86 and x86-64
* ARM

> * AArch64

Reviewer 3: Considering for the first time aarch64 neon intrinsics are stable, would it maybe make sense to highlight that in this section or another some more?

Reviewer 2: I think these are noted in the stabilized APIs section -- I definitely wouldn't add them to the asm section, but I think we could add a separate block. I'm not sure how significant their stabilization is.

* RISC-V

You can see more examples of inline assembly in [Rust By Example][asm-example],
and find more detailed documentation in the [reference][asm-reference].

[asm-example]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/rust-by-example/unsafe/asm.html
[asm-reference]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/reference/inline-assembly.html

### Destructuring assignments

You can now use tuple, slice, and struct patterns as the left hand side of an
assignment.

```rust
let (a, b, c, d, e);

(a, b) = (1, 2);
[c, .., d, _] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
Struct { e, .. } = Struct { e: 5, f: 3 };

assert_eq!([1, 2, 1, 4, 5], [a, b, c, d, e]);
```

This makes assignment more consistent with let bindings, which allow you to do

> the same thing. Note that assignments with operators such as `+=` are not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the same thing. Note that destructuring assignments with operators such as `+=` are not
```

Sometimes bugs in the Rust compiler cause it to accept code that should not
have been accepted. An example of this was [borrows of packed struct
fields][packed_borrows] being allowed in safe code.

[packed_borrows]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/46043

While this happens very rarely, it can be quite disruptive when a crate used by
your project has code that will no longer be allowed. In fact, you might not
notice until your project inexplicably stops building!

cargo now shows you warnings when a dependency will be rejected by a future
version of Rust. After running `cargo build` or `cargo check`, you might see:

```
warning: the following packages contain code that will be rejected by a future version of Rust: old_dep v0.1.0
note: to see what the problems were, use the option `--future-incompat-report`, or run `cargo report future-incompatibilities --id 1`
```

You can run the `cargo report` command mentioned in the warning to see a full
report of the code that will be rejected. This gives you time to upgrade your
dependency before it breaks your build.

### Creating stripped binaries

It's often useful to strip unnecessary information like debuginfo from binaries

> you distribute, making them smaller.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add something about std shipping with debuginfo = 1 by default or something, which is why release builds may benefit from this even if they don't themselves turn on debug?

Reviewer: Done in a suggestion below.

While it has always been possible to do this manually after the binary is
created, cargo and rustc now support stripping when the binary is linked. To
enable this, add the following to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[profile.release]
strip = "debuginfo"
```

This causes debuginfo to be stripped from release binaries. You can also supply
`"symbols"` or just `true` to strip all symbol information where supported.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The standard library ships with debug symbols by default, so Rust binaries built without debug symbols enabled still by default include the debug symbols of the standard library. The `strip` allows you to remove those symbols, producing smaller Rust binaries.

```

If you have a previous version of Rust installed via rustup, getting Rust 1.59.0 is as easy as:

```console
rustup update stable
```

If you don't have it already, you can [get `rustup`][install]
from the appropriate page on our website, and check out the
[detailed release notes for 1.59.0][notes] on GitHub.

[install]: https://www.rust-lang.org/install.html
[notes]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/RELEASES.md#version-1590-2022-02-24

## What's in 1.59.0 stable

### Inline assembly

The Rust language now supports inline assembly. This enables many applications
of Rust that need very low-level control over their execution, or access to
specialized machine instructions.

When compiling for x86-64 targets, for instance, you can now write:

```rust
use std::arch::asm;

// Multiply x by 6 using shifts and adds
let mut x: u64 = 4;
unsafe {
    asm!(
        "mov {tmp}, {x}",
        "shl {tmp}, 1",
        "shl {x}, 2",
        "add {x}, {tmp}",
        x = inout(reg) x,
        tmp = out(reg) _,
    );
}
assert_eq!(x, 4 * 6);
```

The format string syntax used to name registers in the `asm!` and `global_asm!`

> macros is the same used in Rust format strings, so it should feel quite familiar

Reviewer 4: Maybe a link on  `format strings` to https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/fmt?

to Rust programmers.

> The assembly language and instructions available in the assembly code itself vary according

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The assembly language and instructions available with inline assembly vary according
```

to the target architecture. Today, the stable Rust compiler supports inline assembly on the following architectures:

* x86 and x86-64
* ARM
* AArch64
* RISC-V

You can see more examples of inline assembly in [Rust By Example][asm-example],
and find more detailed documentation in the [reference][asm-reference].

[asm-example]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/rust-by-example/unsafe/asm.html
[asm-reference]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/reference/inline-assembly.html

### Destructuring assignments

> You can now use tuple, slice, and struct patterns as the left hand side of an

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can now use tuple, slice, and struct patterns as the left-hand side of an
```

Cargo now shows you warnings when a dependency will be rejected by a future
version of Rust. After running `cargo build` or `cargo check`, you might see:

```
warning: the following packages contain code that will be rejected by a future version of Rust: old_dep v0.1.0
note: to see what the problems were, use the option `--future-incompat-report`, or run `cargo report future-incompatibilities --id 1`
```

You can run the `cargo report` command mentioned in the warning to see a full
report of the code that will be rejected. This gives you time to upgrade your
dependency before it breaks your build.

### Creating stripped binaries

It's often useful to strip unnecessary information like debuginfo from binaries
you distribute, making them smaller.

While it has always been possible to do this manually after the binary is
created, cargo and rustc now support stripping when the binary is linked. To
enable this, add the following to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[profile.release]
strip = "debuginfo"
```

This causes debuginfo to be stripped from release binaries. You can also supply
`"symbols"` or just `true` to strip all symbol information where supported.

> The standard library typically ships with debug symbols, so Rust binaries built without debug symbols enabled still include the debug symbols of the standard library by default. Using `strip` allows you to remove those symbols, producing smaller Rust binaries.

Reviewer 2: The option should be capable of stripping symbols, yes. I've adjusted the wording to hopefully make that clearer.

### Stabilized APIs

> The following methods and trait implementations were stabilized.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following methods and trait implementations are now stabilized:
```

- [`std::thread::available_parallelism`][available_parallelism]
- [`hash_map::Entry::insert_entry`][entry_insert_entry]
- [`hash_map::VacantEntry::insert_entry`][vacant_insert_entry]
- [`Result::copied`][result-copied]
- [`Result::cloned`][result-cloned]
- [`arch::asm!`][asm]
- [`arch::global_asm!`][global_asm]
- [`ops::ControlFlow::is_break`][is_break]
- [`ops::ControlFlow::is_continue`][is_continue]
- [`TryFrom<char> for u8`][try_from_char_u8]
- [`char::TryFromCharError`][try_from_char_err]
  implementing `Clone`, `Debug`, `Display`, `PartialEq`, `Copy`, `Eq`, `Error`
- [`iter::zip`][zip]
- [`NonZeroU8::is_power_of_two`][is_power_of_two8]
- [`NonZeroU16::is_power_of_two`][is_power_of_two16]
- [`NonZeroU32::is_power_of_two`][is_power_of_two32]
- [`NonZeroU64::is_power_of_two`][is_power_of_two64]
- [`NonZeroU128::is_power_of_two`][is_power_of_two128]
- [`DoubleEndedIterator for ToLowercase`][lowercase]
- [`DoubleEndedIterator for ToUppercase`][uppercase]
- [`TryFrom<&mut [T]> for [T; N]`][tryfrom_ref_arr]
- [`UnwindSafe for Once`][unwindsafe_once]
- [`RefUnwindSafe for Once`][refunwindsafe_once]
- [armv8 neon intrinsics for aarch64][stdarch/1266]

> The following previously stable functions are now `const`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following previously stable functions are now `const`:
```

- [`mem::MaybeUninit::as_ptr`][muninit_ptr]
- [`mem::MaybeUninit::assume_init`][muninit_init]
- [`mem::MaybeUninit::assume_init_ref`][muninit_init_ref]
- [`ffi::CStr::from_bytes_with_nul_unchecked`][cstr_from_bytes]

### Incremental compilation off by default

The 1.59.0 release disables incremental by default (unless explicitly asked for
by an environment variable, with `RUSTC_FORCE_INCREMENTAL=1`). This mitigates a
[known bug] which can cause deserialization errors (and panics) during compilation
with incremental compilation turned on.

> This particular bug is preexisting, and was exposed due to other bugs fixed in

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This particular bug is preexisting and had already been fixed on the nightly and beta corresponding to 1.60. It was exposed due to other bugs fixed in
```

incremental in the 1.59 release cycle. As we continue to fix bugs in incremental

> compilation, new bugs may get surfaced which were previously hidden; due to a

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
compilation, new bugs may get surfaced which were previously hidden. Due to a
```

reluctance to ship unknown problems we have avoided aggressively backporting
incremental-related changes. This is in part due to having limited ability to
exercise incremental in automated tests, which means that we currently must rely
on user-submitted issues to determine the likely level of impact and make
decisions to enable or disable incremental for a given release cycle.

This particular bug is already fixed on beta and should roll out to stable 1.60.
We have not made a decision yet as to whether 1.60 will re-enable incremental

> compilation by default.

Reviewer 5: Although being noncommittal is ok, I wouldn't want us to give the wrong impressions that we wouldn't reenable it if we don't find other cases in the wild.

Reviewer 5: Make it clear that there's high likelihood that incremental will be enabled in 1.60, because *this* bug has already been fixed there. The wording here is present of course because *other* bugs might crop up.

[known bug]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/94124

### Other changes

> There are other changes in the Rust 1.59.0 release: check out what changed in

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are other changes in the Rust 1.59.0 release. Check out what changed in
```

It's often useful to strip unnecessary information like debuginfo from binaries
you distribute, making them smaller.

While it has always been possible to do this manually after the binary is
created, cargo and rustc now support stripping when the binary is linked. To
enable this, add the following to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[profile.release]
strip = "debuginfo"
```

This causes debuginfo to be stripped from release binaries. You can also supply
`"symbols"` or just `true` to strip all symbol information where supported.

The standard library typically ships with debug symbols and line-level
debuginfo, so Rust binaries built without debug symbols enabled still include
the debug information from the standard library by default. Using the `strip`
option allows you to remove this extra information, producing smaller Rust
binaries.

See [Cargo's documentation][cargo-docs] for more details.

[cargo-docs]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/beta/cargo/reference/profiles.html#strip

### Stabilized APIs

The following methods and trait implementations are now stabilized:

- [`std::thread::available_parallelism`][available_parallelism]
- [`hash_map::Entry::insert_entry`][entry_insert_entry]

> - [`hash_map::VacantEntry::insert_entry`][vacant_insert_entry]

Reviewer 6: These stabilizations were reverted iirc.

- [`TryFrom<char> for u8`][try_from_char_u8]
- [`char::TryFromCharError`][try_from_char_err]
  implementing `Clone`, `Debug`, `Display`, `PartialEq`, `Copy`, `Eq`, `Error`
- [`iter::zip`][zip]
- [`NonZeroU8::is_power_of_two`][is_power_of_two8]
- [`NonZeroU16::is_power_of_two`][is_power_of_two16]
- [`NonZeroU32::is_power_of_two`][is_power_of_two32]
- [`NonZeroU64::is_power_of_two`][is_power_of_two64]
- [`NonZeroU128::is_power_of_two`][is_power_of_two128]
- [`DoubleEndedIterator for ToLowercase`][lowercase]
- [`DoubleEndedIterator for ToUppercase`][uppercase]
- [`TryFrom<&mut [T]> for [T; N]`][tryfrom_ref_arr]
- [`UnwindSafe for Once`][unwindsafe_once]
- [`RefUnwindSafe for Once`][refunwindsafe_once]
- [armv8 neon intrinsics for aarch64][stdarch/1266]

The following previously stable functions are now `const`:

- [`mem::MaybeUninit::as_ptr`][muninit_ptr]
- [`mem::MaybeUninit::assume_init`][muninit_init]
- [`mem::MaybeUninit::assume_init_ref`][muninit_init_ref]
- [`ffi::CStr::from_bytes_with_nul_unchecked`][cstr_from_bytes]

### Incremental compilation off by default

The 1.59.0 release disables incremental by default (unless explicitly asked for

> by via an environment variable: `RUSTC_FORCE_INCREMENTAL=1`). This mitigates

Reviewer 7: Could you reword thus to avoid "for by via"?

> The 1.59.0 release disables incremental by default (unless explicitly asked for
> by via an environment variable: `RUSTC_FORCE_INCREMENTAL=1`). This mitigates

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The 1.59.0 release disables incremental by default (unless explicitly asked for
by setting an environment variable: `RUSTC_FORCE_INCREMENTAL=1`). This mitigates
```

> by via an environment variable: `RUSTC_FORCE_INCREMENTAL=1`). This mitigates a

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
by via an environment variable: `RUSTC_FORCE_INCREMENTAL=1`). This mitigates
```

dependency before it breaks your build.

### Creating stripped binaries

It's often useful to strip unnecessary information like debuginfo from binaries
you distribute, making them smaller.

While it has always been possible to do this manually after the binary is
created, cargo and rustc now support stripping when the binary is linked. To
enable this, add the following to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[profile.release]
strip = "debuginfo"
```

This causes debuginfo to be stripped from release binaries. You can also supply
`"symbols"` or just `true` to strip all symbol information where supported.

The standard library typically ships with debug symbols and line-level
debuginfo, so Rust binaries built without debug symbols enabled still include
the debug information from the standard library by default. Using the `strip`
option allows you to remove this extra information, producing smaller Rust
binaries.

See [Cargo's documentation][cargo-docs] for more details.

[cargo-docs]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/beta/cargo/reference/profiles.html#strip

### Incremental compilation off by default

The 1.59.0 release disables incremental by default (unless explicitly asked for

> by via an environment variable: `RUSTC_FORCE_INCREMENTAL=1`). This mitigates a

Reviewer 4: Somehow this typo crept back in?

```suggestion
by via an environment variable: `RUSTC_FORCE_INCREMENTAL=1`). This mitigates
```

- [`ffi::CStr::from_bytes_with_nul_unchecked`][cstr_from_bytes]

### Incremental compilation off by default

The 1.59.0 release disables incremental by default (unless explicitly asked for
by an environment variable, with `RUSTC_FORCE_INCREMENTAL=1`). This mitigates a
known bug which can cause deserialization errors (and panics) during compilation
with incremental compilation turned on.

This particular bug is preexisting, and was exposed due to other bugs fixed in
incremental in the 1.59 release cycle. As we continue to fix bugs in incremental
compilation, new bugs may get surfaced which were previously hidden; due to a
reluctance to ship unknown problems we have avoided aggressively backporting
incremental-related changes. This is in part due to having limited ability to
exercise incremental in automated tests, which means that we currently must rely
on user-submitted issues to determine the likely level of impact and make
decisions to enable or disable incremental for a given release cycle.

This particular bug is already fixed on beta and should roll out to stable 1.60.
We have not made a decision yet as to whether 1.60 will re-enable incremental

> compilation by default.

Author: I think this paragraph should go second, or at least the first sentence should be moved up. The wording "we have avoided aggressively backporting incremental-related changes" above makes more sense given this context. You could potentially pull that into this paragraph as well, which frames the situation more positively – we already have a fix, but want to ensure that we're shipping high quality releases by following the release process. This feature only affects build times so it's safest to disable for this release.

Also, "This particular bug is" is repeated at the beginning of both paragraphs.
